+++
draft = false
date = "2025-06-05T11:51:48+02:00"
lastmod = ""
layout = "page"

title = "Netlify"
author = "oxypteros"
license = "CC0"
github_edit = true
series = "Alpha Docs"
  parts = "Deployment"
  weight = 600
categories = ["Deployment"]

recommended = false
featured = false
description = "Netlify deployment for Alpha theme: Learn to deploy via Git/upload, set build commands, env vars (Hugo/Node), manage baseURL, and use netlify.toml."
+++
Netlify allows deployment by **importing a Git repository** from *GitHub*, *GitLab*, *BitBucket* and *Azure DevOps* or with **direct upload** .

## Deploy on Netlify
After signing up and logging into [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/):

From the **Projects** dashboard, choose:
- [Import from Git](#import-from-git), or
- [Deploy manually](#deploy-manually-with-upload) with upload.

### Import from Git
1. Choose your Git Provider and connect your account.
1. After authentication, select your Alpha repository from the list.

Set the following:
1. **Project name** --- This will define your site’s URL: `https://[project-name].netlify.app`
    1. In your root `hugo.toml` set
    ```toml
    baseURL = "https://[project-name].netlify.app"
    ``` 
    2. Commit and push the change to the Git Provider
2. **Build command**:
    - With search:
    ```bash
    hugo --gc --minify && npx pagefind --site "public"
    ```
    - Without search:
    ```bash
    hugo --gc --minify
    ```
- **Environment variables** ( Add key/value pairs)
  - Key: `HUGO_VERSION` 
  - Value: `0.147.3`
  **Note**: Use a `HUGO_VERSION` greater than `0.146.1`, ideally matching your local version.

Click **Deploy `[project-name]`**. 
Once deployment finishes, click **View Deploy Project**.

Every push to your Git repository will trigger an automatic deployment.

### Deploy Manually with upload
1. Build your site locally:
    - With Search: 
    ```bash
    hugo --gc --minify && npx pagefind --site "public"
    ```
    - Without Search: 
    ```bash
    hugo --gc --minify
    ```
    **Note**: Pagefind search requires [Node.js installed locally](/docs/developing-alpha/install-node).
2. On the *Projects* page under ***...or deploy manually***  click **browse to upload**.
3. Change file type filter from `.zip` to **All files**, then upload your built `public/` folder.
4. At the *Deploy success!* click **Get Started**
5. Navigate to **Domain Management** → **Production Domains**. 
6. Click **Options** → **Edit Project Name** to change the autogenerated name to something personal, then click **Save**.
7. Update `baseURL` in `hugo.toml`
```toml
baseURL = "https://[project-name].netlify.app"
```

{{< status-card TITLE="Attention" TYPE="warning" >}}
Netlify auto-assigns a project name after the first upload.
For your Hugo site to work, you **must rebuild your site** with the correct `baseURL` and **re-upload**.
{{< /status-card>}}

For future deployments:
1. Build your site locally.
1. Navigate to **Projects** → **[your project name]**.
1. Click **Deploys** --> **browse to upload** and re-upload the updated `public/` folder.

## Netlify File Config & Headers (Optional)

### Netlify TOML
Netlify settings can be configured not only from the Netlify dashboard but also from a `netlify.toml` file placed at the root of your project.

Alpha includes a boilerplate `netlify.toml` file with two base rules: `build.command` and `build.environment`.
You’ll find this file at: `themes/alpha/netlify.toml`

#### How to Use
1. **Copy** the file from `/themes/alpha/netlify.toml` to your site's  root directory (**not** `static/`, but the actual root of your project).
2. **Customize** and **expand** the configuration as needed for your project.

This file is a starting point. For a complete reference, see the official [Netlify netlify.toml documentation](https://docs.netlify.com/configure-builds/file-based-configuration/).

{{< status-card TITLE="netlify.toml" TYPE="warning">}}
Settings defined in `netlify.toml` override those in the Netlify dashboard.
Alpha recommends using the file **only** for settings that can't be configured in the UI.
{{< /status-card >}}

### Custom Headers File
Alpha also includes a `_headers` file preconfigured for a default Alpha installation, located at: `/themes/alpha/static/_headers`. 

This file allows you to define HTTP headers for Netlify, including security-related ones. 

Refer to the [official documentation](https://docs.netlify.com/routing/headers/) for syntax details, available options, and best practices..

{{< status-card TITLE="Warning" TYPE="warning" >}}
Some headers (especially related to **cross-origin policies** or **Content Security Policy (CSP)**) can break your site or block third-party embeds if misconfigured. Always test your site thoroughly before going live.
{{< /status-card >}}

#### How to Use
1. **Copy** the `_headers` file from `/themes/alpha/static` to your site's own`static/` directory.
2. **Review** and **customize** the rules to match your site’s security and performance needs.